feat: extend Clients via `client.extend` + tree-shakable Clients (#791)
wagmi-dev/viem: site/docs/clients/custom.md

---
head:
  - - meta
    - property: og:title
      content: Build your own Client
  - - meta
    - name: description
      content: Build your own viem Client.
  - - meta
    - property: og:description
      content: Build your own viem Client.

---

# Build your own Client

> You can build your own viem Client by using the `createClient` function and optionally extending (`.extend`) it – this is how viem's internal Clients (Public, Wallet, and Test) are built.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can build your own viem Client by using the `createClient` function and optionally extending (`.extend`) it – this is how viem's internal Clients ([Public](/docs/clients/public), [Wallet](/docs/clients/wallet), and [Test](/docs/clients/test)) are built.
```

> Building your own Client is useful if you have opinions on what the Client should do, and if you want to extend that Client with custom functionality (ie. create an [EIP-4337 Bundler](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-4337#rpc-methods-eth-namespace) Client, or [geth Debug](https://geth.ethereum.org/docs/interacting-with-geth/rpc/ns-debug) Client).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Building your own Client is useful if you have specific requirements for how the Client should behave, and if you want to extend that Client with custom functionality (ie. create an [EIP-4337 Bundler](https://eips.ethereum.org/EIPS/eip-4337#rpc-methods-eth-namespace) Client, or [geth Debug](https://geth.ethereum.org/docs/interacting-with-geth/rpc/ns-debug) Client).
```

## Import

```ts
import { createClient } from 'viem'
```

## Usage

Initialize a Client with your desired [Chain](/docs/clients/chains) (e.g. `mainnet`) and [Transport](/docs/clients/intro) (e.g. `http`).

```ts
import { createClient, http } from 'viem'
import { mainnet } from 'viem/chains'

const client = createClient({ 
  chain: mainnet,
  transport: http()
})
```

Next, you can either [extend your Client with Actions or configuration](#extending-with-actions-or-configuration), or you can use it as-is for the purpose of [maximizing tree-shaking in your app](#tree-shaking).

### Extending with Actions or configuration

You can extend your Client with custom Actions or configuration by using the `.extend` function.

Below is a naive implementation of implementing a [geth Debug](https://geth.ethereum.org/docs/interacting-with-geth/rpc/ns-debug) Client with a `traceCall` Action that uses the `debug_traceCall` RPC method.

```ts {12-21,23-29}
import { 
  createClient, 
  http,
  formatTransactionRequest,
  type CallParameters
} from 'viem'
import { mainnet } from 'viem/chains'

const debugClient = createClient({ 
  chain: mainnet,
  transport: http(),
}).extend(client => ({

>   ...,
>   async traceCall(args: CallParameters) {
>     return client.request({
>       method: 'debug_traceCall',
>       params: [formatTransactionRequest(args), 'latest', {}]
>     })
>   },
>   ...

Reviewer: Making it copy-paste-able

```suggestion
  // ...
  async traceCall(args: CallParameters) {
    return client.request({
      method: 'debug_traceCall',
      params: [formatTransactionRequest(args), 'latest', {}]
    })
  },
  // ...
```

}))

const response = await debugClient.traceCall({
  from: '0xdeadbeef29292929192939494959594933929292',
  to: '0xde929f939d939d393f939393f93939f393929023',
  gas: 69420n,
  data: '0xf00d4b5d00000000000000000000000001291230982139282304923482304912923823920000000000000000000000001293123098123928310239129839291010293810'
})
// { failed: false, gas: 69420, returnValue: '...', structLogs: [] }
```

> For a more succinct implementation of using `.extend`, check out viem's [Public Client implementation](#TODO) extended with [Public Actions](#TODO).

Reviewer: Do these link to GitHub source?

Author: shit, they should hey

### Tree-shaking

You can use the Client as-is, with no decorated Actions, to maximize tree-shaking in your app. This is useful if you are pedantic about bundle size and want to only include the Actions you use.

> In the example below, instead of calling `getBlock` from `client`, we are importing the Action directly from `viem` and then injecting our Client as the first parameter to the Action.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the example below, instead of calling `getBlock` from the Public Client, we are importing the Action directly from `viem` and then injecting our Client as the first parameter to the Action.
```
